We are.
You said.
We are...
Ushed!
The Blyther Ushed!
And we've been doing a project about...
The myths and legends of North Wales.
So now we're going to tell you the story of Cantor Gwelod.
Or... the War of the Well.
People say the land of Cantor Gwelod lies far below the sea in Cardigan Bay.
They say that in the Middle Ages it was a marshy land that ran beside the coast with gates to keep out the sea.
The King of Cantor Gwelod appointed a man called Saith Ennin to shut the gates at high tide.
And open them again at low tide.
But Saith Ennin was a drunk.
So one day he forgot to shut the gates and the sea came in and drowned the land.
But we know another much older version of this story.
Which we're going to tell you now.
With a bit of our own embroidery.
After all, that's what you do with legends, isn't it?
You change them.
In this version of the legend, the daughter of the King is called Mererid.
I'm going to be Mererid now.
When I was a little girl, my father the King said...
Mererid, I'm going to make you the priestess of our sacred well.
Every day you must draw three buckets of water from the well and carry them for a mile.
Then empty them into the river by the castle.
A mile? That's a long way.
Yep.
Three buckets?
Every morning?
Yep. And every night.
That's a lot of buckets.
Yep.
That's six buckets.
Is it? Yes, I think so. Three plus three equals...
It is, Dad. I know.
I did GCSE maths at the Cantrigal College School for princesses.
Well, anyway, this will all keep the spirit of the sacred well happy.
Who, in turn, will keep everything happy in our kingdom.
And what if I don't want to do it?
Then the spirit of the sacred well will let fall a curse upon the land.
What kind of curse?
Not a clue.
Anyone ever seen this spirit?
Nope. It's a bit like the god of the 21st century.
The who of the what?
The god of the 21st century.
In the future, it hasn't happened yet.
You never see him, but you have to believe.
Hmm. Not sure I do.
Well, here I am, 16 years later, carrying those buckets.
I've been doing it for so many years now that I've really had enough.
My hands hurt. More than anything, my hands hurt.
My legs feel heavy. Gravity is constantly against me.
But I can't disappoint my dad.
Don't want to be a failure.
And with this curse, I've got no choice anyway.
Oh well. No more complaining.
Just get on with it.
The locals watch Merarid come and go.
Every day she goes past here with her buckets.
My name's Matt. I've lived in Canterbury all my life.
Working in the fields.
Now and again, I like to pop down to my local Canterbury Railroad pub
for an occasional pint of Guinness. Just the odd one.
The odd one, did you say, Grandad?
I think it might be a few more than that.
Well, I reckon I deserve it, Siwan.
So I watch her go past every day with her buckets
and I think not much of a life is it for a young woman.
I wouldn't like it.
Just lately, I see her looking more and more fed up.
There'll be trouble there one day, Siwan. You mark my words.
She won't put up with it forever.
On a fine day, when I'm in the park garden outside, you can hear her muttering.
Why must I do this? Is it even necessary?
Would anyone even notice if I just didn't?
What would happen?
What would be the consequences?
I hate lugging these horrible, heavy buckets around.
If I could stop doing it, I would.
I want to lose this heavy burden once and for all.
I want to be free.
But there's the curse.
Oh, is there?
This spirit might not even be for real.
All this pain, all these aches, all this suffering be for nothing.
It could all be false.
One day, a prince called Rodri makes a royal visit to Mereid's father,
and Princess Mereid comes up with what she thinks is a wonderful plan.
That night, at a great feast held in honor of Rodri,
Princess Mereid has a secret, whispered conversation with him.
What a wonderful feast this is, isn't it, Prince Rodri?
And all in your honor.
Yes, thank you. The best I've ever attended.
It's such a shame it might be the last one we ever have.
The last? Why?
Surely a kingdom like this has many more feasts in its future.
Oh, I thought you already knew. Sorry, excuse me, I shouldn't have said anything.
My father will be home.
No, don't leave. I won't tell him. What's going on?
Well, no, I really shouldn't tell you.
You could trust me.
It's just...Centra Gwelod is in trouble.
Our fields seem to be producing less and less these days.
We had to sacrifice our servants' food for two days to be able to provide this feast.
And our army's getting weaker and weaker.
We have so few men left.
Really? I had no idea.
I'm just so worried that soon someone might invade us.
And whoever it was, I suppose I'd have to marry them.
What if it's a monster of a man?
That would be awful. Is there any way I can help?
Well, I did wonder. No, you wouldn't do that. Ignore me.
No, tell me. I want to help.
Well, it's just, if you were to invade, you'd surely succeed, wouldn't you?
And I wouldn't mind marrying you.
I know you'd care for our people, put us back on track.
But I couldn't do that. Your father trusts me.
Well, you might be saving us from worse.
Well...
Oh, please, please save our kingdom.
Oh, well. If it's to save the kingdom, then...
All right, let's meet later to plan things in detail.
But I'd better go now and drink some wine with the King before he gets suspicious.
Yes! Well, that was easy.
And once I'm married to Rodri, I can live in his kingdom.
And get away from the stupid well.
It won't matter if the curse falls here.
So, Merarid gets Rodri on site, then everything goes wrong with the plan.
Mabon again. And all I want is a quiet pint after a hard day's work.
But oh, no, not in Cantra Greylord. I'm just sitting down with my Pints of Guinness.
And the next thing I know, I hear these drums.
And they get closer and closer. I'm watching the vibrations of them in my pint.
Then there's a silence. And I'm just about to take a drink.
When the next minute a window breaks and a man hurls through it.
And then a whole horde of men come clashing in, fighting over falling in the pub soldiers.
Grandad! Grandad! Are you in there?
Come on, you need to leave. There's a battle going on.
I grab my pint and I try dodging all the fists to make it to Sion at the back door.
Next thing, a white goat comes running through the door.
And knocks me off my feet, leaving me and my pint on the floor.
So I help him up. Grandad, not the goat.
Suddenly we're stuck in the middle of a battle. I'm lucky to make it home alive.
What a night. All I wanted was a quiet pint.
In the battle, it is Rodri's invading army that is defeated, not the army of Cantigualod.
So Mereyd's plan fails. Prince Rodri has taken prisoner. He is furious.
That wretch Mereyd. She lied. This country isn't weak at all.
How dare she whisper poison in my ears. Make me risk my men. All my people.
Why did I fall for such a pretty face and pretty allies?
I wish I could go back in time and cover my ears. Protect them from the poison that slowly seeped into them.
I was such an idiot. Now, here in this prison, these thoughts, these regrets.
They won't leave me alone. I can't take it anymore.
I need to escape. I need to escape this endless silence.
Shall I tell the king who betrayed him? Tell him it was his own daughter.
I know he wants to know. Maybe. Maybe I could use it as a bargaining chip.
Maybe he'll let me go free if I tell him.
While Rodri schemes, Mereyd knows her life hangs in the balance.
So now it's all over. My plan has failed. I don't know what to do. My father's going to find out what I've done.
Rodri will tell him. Will he show me mercy? Does he even know how?
I wish I never tried to escape from my life.
I just felt so trapped, so burdened by duty. But there must have been a better way.
It didn't feel like there was. What about free will? Where was my free will?
I need to fix this. How can I? How can I keep my father from finding out what I've done?
What if? What if I didn't do my duty at the well today?
Just to see what the spirit will do. If the curse will really fall.
Maybe if the curse falls, whatever it is, in all the confusion, Rodri won't tell my father about me.
Or maybe Rodri will die. Or my father will die. Or will I die? After all, I've nothing to lose.
That night, Rodri tells the King about Mereyd's treachery. It doesn't help him. The King just sends him back to prison.
And then he thinks about his daughter.
Hmm. What a sly little thing you've turned out to be. I guess I should have seen it coming. You've always resented me.
Carrying your buckets again this evening, are you? They must be heavier than ever today. Do you feel your back begin to break?
The weight of all that guilt? The tears and pain you've brought to my people?
Well, you forced my hand. When you've finished your duties tonight, I will have my soldiers seize you. I will punish you.
But in fact, that evening, as Mereyd heads to the river, she isn't carrying any heavy buckets at all.
She's only pretending to. Has only pretended to fill her buckets with water at the sacred well.
And plans to fake emptying them, just to see what will happen.
To see if the spirit will notice what the spirit will do, if anything, if a curse will fall.
Well, that night, whether it is the spirit's doing or not, the ancient sacred well of Cantiguaulod erupts,
shooting a sky-high jet of water into the air, sending an endless tower of water upwards, filling the sky, which then smashes back down onto the ground and floods the land.
What have I done?
So there's me having a nice pint inside my local, and I ain't moved for a while.
And all of a sudden I hear outside, we're flooding!
Then I see water starting to go up the pub walls.
And then the next minute, I see this cow floating past the window.
And I'm just standing there holding my pint.
And then they're all coming in screaming and shouting.
Grandad! Grandad, where are you? Oh, you silly old wretch!
Come on, Grandad, you have to get out of here!
And the next minute I've got water in my wellies.
Grandad, this soaks! We have to go or we'll drown!
Aye, I've got wet feet, but I'm not moving until I finish this pint. I am staying here until I finish what I've started.
And that is the end of Cantergwellod.
We'd like to think they all escaped.
Mererid, her father, King Gwyfnor, Prince Rodri, and especially Suan.
And Mabon with his pint of Guinness.
But we'll never know for sure.
All we do know is that in both versions of the legend,
submerged beneath the Irish Sea in Cardigan Bay.
Although they do say you can hear a bell ringing sometimes from beneath the waves.
But the War of the Well is our favourite version of the legend.
With a bit of imaginative detail added by...
The Bliner, you are now in the Royal Castle.
And you are now in the Royal Castle.
With a bit of imaginative detail added by...
The Bliner, you shed.
We are.
You shed.